Good morning.
Welcome back to the, uh, governance
and Administration Committee.
Um, it's great to have you here
and we've got a relatively decent amount of time to go
through quite a substantive report that you've produced
for us, uh, and covers some quite important
themes and insights.
So, uh, we'll give you,
I think it would actually be quite good if you would be able
to kind of go through some of the Yeah.
Key areas in, in thinking behind Yeah. The report.
And then we will move to some questions from committee
members over to you. Okay.
Thank you. Um, thanks for the opportunity to speak
to the long term insights.
Briefly, I just introduced on my right, I have Hugo Vital,
who is the deputy secretary responsible, uh, for this.
And Carl Butler, who worked, the three of us, worked
to get this document produced.
So just some preliminary comments about,
you know, why this topic.
I, I think from our perspective, um, integrity
as a principle is under challenge.
It's under challenge globally,
and it's under challenge in New Zealand.
And we thought it appropriate to reflect on those challenges
and how we reorientate and reposition our current system
and processes to make sure that it is
strengthened in the face of those challenges.
Um, I think
integrity is at the heart of what we do.
Um, it is the thing that allows the public
to have confidence and trust in us,
and so it's continuing to evolve.
We do have some, we have a piece of paper we could hand
around, if that's useful for you,
which provides the structure of what we're going to talk to.
Yeah, it would be quite useful actually.
And she goes, just gonna step us through and,
and chair, if you just want to maybe just go through section
by section and then you can ask the questions that you, um,
yeah, that, I think that would, that Okay.
Helpful. Thank you. Thank you.
Uh, thank you. Hopefully Haven. We got enough copies.
Should, There's only one page. Just one. One.
I was actually had some, um,
actually had some technological problems.
Well, I decided yesterday not to do the screen.
That's, sorry. Here you go.
Uh, yes. Thank you. Um, I mean, we, uh, have been,
as the commission have been, uh,
concerned about international trends, actually going back to
sort of the mid, uh, 20 15, 20 16, uh, that sat
behind the work that we did on the Public Service Act
and the need to, uh, put the public service principles, uh,
and the values into legislation so that, uh,
it was a clear articulation of the role
of the public service and some of the core principles
and values that sat behind
what the public service was about.
Uh, I think the long-term insights briefing, uh,
we, we do this sort of scanning as a matter of course.
Uh, this is part of the work that we do.
Um, long term insights briefing, um,
was an opportunity for us to, uh, work
through some of the, uh, uh, challenges
and opportunities, uh, that faced, uh, new, uh, sort
of New Zealand and the public service.
Just very quickly, uh, the topic, uh, for the briefing, uh,
was publicly consulted on, which was part
of the requirements on the Public Service Act.
Uh, we got public submissions, uh,
and, uh, this topic had, uh, overall the, the most, uh,
responses for us to, um, take forward.
Uh, and, uh, we also consulted on the draft briefing.
Uh, so we got input from the public
and we also got input from academics.
It is a small, uh, group.
We did get more than we did last time.
Uh, but there were some insightful things from there.
Just very quickly. Uh, I mean, I think, um, as,
as outlined here, uh, we see sort of some trends
and challenges emerging.
Uh, so clearly, uh,
social trends are quite sort of topical.
Uh, uh, some of the sort of technology challenges.
The, uh, social, uh, polarization,
I think is covered in the, in the briefing, um,
and demographic change.
Uh, and, and of course we've got, uh, through, uh,
increased, um, activity across borders, uh,
and, uh, technology change, uh, the challenges of, um,
serious organized crime as well.
Technologically, of course, there's massive changes, uh,
with the emergence of ai
and of course how we do that in a safe and ethical way.
Uh, economic, uh,
and fiscal pressures, uh, across the globe, uh, being faced.
Uh, and of course the sort
of global international environment is, um, quite dynamic
and challenging and unpredictable.
And, uh, for a long time we've started to see, um, sort
of challenges in the, the political space, polarization
challenges to, uh, electoral integrity, uh,
and, um, you know, geopolitical, uh, shifts.
Uh, so, which are all part of our context.
So I might just stop there if, uh, or I can carry on.
Yeah. I suppose, um, one of the first questions, um, one
of the first questions I had, uh, around, and,
and I think one of the first sections you cover is the New
Zealand's position in relation to other comparable countries
and our, our, and our traditional, um, position as, uh,
one of the world leaders in transparency.
And we saw in 2024, the first time a slight dip in
that, um, ranking.
Mm-hmm. And I think, obviously there's like
around something like 30 recommendations in here,
but what, what are we kind of actively doing to address
that specific, um, issue?
And from your knowledge
and analysis of how those are calculated, what,
what do you think is the main thing
that has led to that decline?
Mm-hmm. So is that, are you referring him specifically
to the Transparency International?
Yes. Yeah. Uh, perceptions of corruption.
So it's correct that where, um, our rankings have, um,
gone down from, uh, essentially first, uh, uh,
to currently fourth, and it's held up at forth.
Uh, the difficulty with the Transparency International, uh,
rankings is rather ironically that they're not
that transparent about the methodology and the index.
So the work we've started doing is working
with the OECD in 2023, uh, to, uh,
so we've engaged with them on their trust, uh, survey.
Uh, that trust survey, uh, has been expanded, uh,
and we are just awaiting results
of the most recent version of that.
Uh, what that helps us do, so what we did as a result
of the trust survey, which we think helps us understand
the drivers of trust, uh, so as part of the 2023 survey,
the OECD recommended
that we add in additional questions into the Kiwi's count
survey, which we've done around drivers of trust.
Um, and, uh, so we added those in
and we also boosted our sample set from a thousand
to 2000 every quarter.
Uh, so with those changes, we're starting
to get much more robust sense of the drivers
of trust for New Zealanders.
Uh, at the moment, the latest results are in terms
of service experience, uh, 84%
of New Zealanders are satisfied.
That's actually the highest ranking we've had,
uh, on that series.
Uh, in addition, public trust in the public service has gone
up to 64%, uh, for comparison trust in the private sector,
although that's increased quite significantly is 51%,
so quite a bit lower.
Underneath those drivers, we're getting much more data about
what actually drives trust.
So those are some of the things we're doing to try
and understand what the actual drivers are.
The transparency surveys important, I don't wanna dismiss
that because it's a perception survey, uh,
and we are concerned about that.
But underlying that, we're trying to get to the, to drivers
to understand, uh, the impacts of what we do in terms
of Kiwi's trust and confidence.
We we're also driving stronger processes within the public
sector to make it really clear
about it's everybody's responsibility to understand
and maintain standards.
And I think with the recent release of the code of conduct,
um, stronger reporting
and measurement of things that go wrong,
it gives us a better insight.
And we do have a network
of integrity champs embedded across.
Um, it, these things are all important for us to understand
where the mood is and where the balances, because, you know,
although we have slipped, we are still the envy
of many other countries that, you know.
So we are fortunate that I think integrity
continues to be highly regarded within the public sector,
but we are not naive to suggest that it's not under threat.
So we're just trying to get the balance right.
Um, but I think the committee can be assured this will
continue to be very dynamic,
I think over the next five to 10 years.
I think the rate of change
and threat in that time will be greater than
what we have experienced in recent decades.
And I'd just also add,
like the Transparency International, um, uh,
surveys about perceptions of corruption in relation
to corruption, specifically the Serious Fraud office,
which was referenced in the briefing,
is leading a cross government work
program on anti-corruption.
Um, as part of that, they had ran a pilot,
an anti-corruption tool that helps agencies
to kind of self assist.
And as part of our, um, fifth National Action plan
with open government partnership, there's a commitment
to kind of further develop that tool
and look at rolling it out agencies more broadly.
So, um, in terms of better understanding the corruption kind
of landscape and how we can respond to that,
And we do fear due to socioeconomic reasons, a number
of people are more vulnerable than would
otherwise be the case to literally turning the other way
and not reporting or not intervening.
I'll just check. Um, I've got three questions sub
to this transparency issue. No, that's
A pretty broad one was not specific.
It was
Okay. Because is
your separate as well. Yeah. Yeah. Okay. Yeah.
Andy, can I just start with two,
uh, two areas of question.
First of all, the, the value of doing the LTIB, um,
given the changes which are, um, you know, uh,
occurring in other legislation,
and would you choose to do the LTIB
because it's worth doing it?
Um, as opposed to, because you have to do it.
Um, uh, I mean, you know, the,
the government policy is, is clear.
There will be one, um,
long-term insights briefing done
on behalf of the public service.
That's one is required, One's required as part
of our usual process.
So we, we do, um, we actually
as a, as a policy shop are continuously doing
this sort of work.
So we, you know, for example, we're looking at, you know,
the latest literature on high performing organizations.
Uh, we're currently also looking at as part of this work,
uh, what, uh, the best type of risk-based sort
of methodology might be to take a risk-based approach,
which is some of the things that the OAG
and Transparency International said
about the approach we take.
So we, uh, continuously scan, uh, and try
and stay on top of the latest literature.
So to answer your question, we, we should be doing,
we should be doing this anyway, the LT a, uh,
had, uh, two different aspects to it.
One was public engagement.
Uh, I must admit that the public engagement on our, uh,
is small because, uh, it's quite a select, uh, uh,
few people who engage, uh,
and also parliamentary discussion.
Now. I think the single briefing, uh,
will, will enable that.
Yeah. Uh, as well.
Uh, but to answer your question, yes, we will do this
and we always should be doing this as part of our job. Yep.
Yes. I, Yeah.
Just to reinforce that this is core to our business, uh, we,
we would do it whether we were mandated to do it or not,
because to, for us to deliver what we need to do, we have to
continue to think and innovate.
Yeah. But that, that's very encouraging.
And then it's, the question then is, is, um, how is that,
um, that thinking, um, being made, would you make that, um,
you know, disseminate that as, as this report does now?
Yeah. Because, you know, it's a lot more valuable
to the wider community
and to parliamentarians if we can actually see it
and go, ah, we, we, we see what you're thinking.
Yeah, we would, because I think we need to have a sort of
informed and contemporary debate about what integrity means.
Yeah. And it's evolving.
And I feel certainly, um, within the core,
this public sector, we, we would, we publish guidance,
we talk to the guidance, we embed it, it is,
it is a much more active process processing,
periodically just doing a report.
Yes. You know, I, I have, as a relative newcomer,
I'm still incredibly impressed by the prominence
that this matter has given.
And it, it's, it's just not talking.
People actually need to do it,
and the chief executives are leading it really well.
Excellent. And look, the other part
of the question I wanted to ask was about, uh,
you talk quite a bit about, um, uh, the, the degree
of polarization, which there is, which I think is, um,
challenging for us as a society.
Uh, we seem worse in other countries, states, for example.
Um, but, uh,
what I'm interested in is polarization within the public
sector and polarization some of the thinking polarization,
some of the behavior at times.
And that, that's one of those things which if people see it,
they don't see the public sector as neutral, they see it as,
you know, as partisan, whichever way it might be.
How do we deal with that?
Are you seeing that? How do we deal with that?
Um, well, so best evidence we have, um,
at the moment is from the public service census.
And actually the, one of the highest rating, uh,
answers in relation to political neutrality, so I understand
what means to be politically neutral, is
that 95% across the public service.
That's a survey that's, uh, done of all public servants.
That said, uh, one of the, uh, things that we are wanting
to do with the Integrity Reset is to, uh,
so the commission has just issued a new code of conduct.
Uh, that code of conduct has both standards
and guidance integrated.
Uh, the past code had a single page code
and, um, 36 pages of guidance, uh,
many public servants didn't know existed.
Uh, alongside that, we, um, we have, it was,
it was a great piece of work.
It's just that times have changed and,
and, um, we've integrated that work.
The second piece is we've got mandatory training.
So that's, uh, so we've got two bits
of mandatory training going out.
The first is, uh, on our election guidance
to make sure public servants understand, uh,
what they can and can't do.
And the second piece is on the code of conduct itself.
Uh, so those are electronic modules
with scenario based learning.
So we are really trying to reinforce what it means
to be a public servant and serve the government of the day.
We also are strengthening our induction processes
to incoming public servants and training them.
And then, as Hugo said, as many other professions do,
you have to remain current in every two to three years,
you get to do another module so
that nobody can ever say they weren't aware of
what the words meant or what their behaviors were expected.
And a lot of that is driven to making sure
that public services are neutral.
We seek the government of the day. Okay, good.
How, how do you, this Supplementary? Yeah.
Um, how do you manage 95%
political neutrality in the public service?
How do you, how do you measure that?
So, so it's a, it's a measure that's done
through the public service census.
Yeah. So it's a, it's a, it's an assessment
of public servants themselves.
Now, the second bit of that is whether they're Right.
Uh, so, you know, you may,
What do you mean by, Well, you may perceive,
for example, that you understand political neutrality.
Yes. But in practice, uh, the,
that can mean different things.
So the important part of, uh, the code
of conduct training, yeah.
Uh, together with the Integrity Champ Champion Network.
So we set up that network for the last 2023 election,
that senior leaders in each agency taking responsibility
for educating and training staff.
Yeah. Um, so we want to make sure that people understand,
uh, essentially the, the code are the sort
of professional boundaries of ethics, if you like.
Uh, and, and as a profession, we look to those in order
to understand and guide our behavior in order to understand
what the right thing to do is.
Now, the right thing to do is not your personal opinion
that's bounded within kind of those rules and processes,
but there are ethical choices and,
and questions about what the right thing to do is.
And that's part of our training for managers as well,
which is scenario based.
So what percentage of the public service at the moment
would be politically neutral?
Well, If your target is 95% not, no,
No, that is 90.
That is, it's a hundred percent.
So a hundred percent of the public
service right now is politically,
That's the target. That's
our target. Oh.
And 95% are 95% s So, so
what can you do about the last 5%, aside from the code
of conduct train, uh, series of
firstly awareness, as Hugo's pointed out,
so they haven't paper what it means.
I think setting examples for them is really important so
that they understand what it means in action.
Um, just maintain a very high level
of awareness about the need to maintain it.
But human beings are human beings, you know?
Um, but a hundred percent is what we would expect
on any given day.
And the survey suggests that there's a gap
when we look into that.
Some of it is a perception, not reality,
but perceptions, raw behaviors.
So we've gotta strengthen process, strengthen example,
and I think strengthen the behaviors that we expect.
I wish you the best with your endeavors.
Other thing, that's the job. That's the,
The other thing that the briefing talks about in this
space as well is, is looking at kind of
recruitment processes.
So it's, it's something
that's quite an emerging thing internationally to kind
of consider what, how you might select
for pro integrity sort of behaviors and attributes.
Yeah. That's the other thing that you can do to make sure
that the people that you are bringing in
and inducting to the public service, um,
have high integrity to begin with.
Thank You. These are, um, really important topics
and I just wanted to double check with you.
Did you have any other, did you wanna make any other
comments, um, on any other areas,
or are you just happy to kind of go
Through this? We we're really happy.
Yeah.
I mean, like you, we do think it's a really important topic,
and it's, when it's breached, we have a problem,
which is why we wanna safeguard it.
Okay. We've got a bit of a speaking list here,
but I've just final stuff on, on that issue.
Obviously no one's debating the importance of
that political neutrality
and like my colleague, um, you know,
a hundred percent is the goal that you should be reaching.
But just in, in terms of the comments around, um,
recruitment and everything, obviously when you are
appointing people, you can't also breach other rights,
like discriminate on political views
and for many low level public servants.
Um, or not, it's probably not a, not the correct term,
but for people that are not in very senior positions,
obviously there will be, um, the ability for them to
have a separate politically active private life and,
and, um, a, uh, neutral, uh, professional life.
And, and how, how are you gonna make sure
that those important, um, rights can exist
beside each other as you go?
That a hundred percent
Hug might wanna kind of, it goes to the heart of
what we've set out in the code of conduct.
You know, you've got a day job to do
and that has to be judged,
but you have a private life as well.
I mean, I think that's just a boundary
that the public sector and the public servants understand,
but we remain really alert to it, particularly in years,
like the current year where it, it, it's under pressure,
but I think the guidance is really clear
and the avenues of when there is a lack
of clarity are very clear as well.
Okay. Okay. Tim,
Thanks. And, and I'm
gonna talk about a similar subject.
Can I just ask one sort of supplementary on Mr.
Rutherford's questions, which is, if,
if the targets a hundred percent
and 95% are self-identifying that they're there, I mean,
it's 5% are self-identifying, they're not,
which means it's probably 10% that actually aren't.
Right. Because most people like it.
I'm kind of shocked that even 5% are willing to go, yeah,
I'm not, I'm not
Politics. It's understand,
understand the concept
of political neutrality, not
not discharged. So you could have,
So 5% don't even understand the concept.
A hundred percent of public servants would say
that they are politically neutral.
I believe that, but 90,
but in the survey it was suggested
that not all people believe even though,
or that they understand what it means
to be politically neutral, is what the question was.
So, so, so here, here's the question I was going to ask.
A couple of years ago, there was a bit
of a trend called quiet quitting,
but people wouldn't actually quit their job.
They would just kind of dragged their heels.
Uh, a lot of people went from time to home at the time,
and they could do all sorts of things.
Now, back then it was a labor government.
Now it's a national, so this is agnostic
to who's in, in government.
But, um, how do you,
there's a leadership piece in here, right?
'cause how do you ensure that public service, uh, in,
in your work serving the government of the day, whoever
that government, whichever political parties make up
that government and,
and that they're actually not just delivering their outcomes
and not, you know, I'm not suggesting anyone's out there
saying, you should vote this party in a work capacity,
or We don't like what the government are doing.
But it's that more subtle undermining kind of,
I don't like this policy that the Greens have
or New Zealand first have, or whoever it might be.
I'm just gonna, we can just sort of quietly slow
that down or drag it.
You know, how do you actually make sure
that you have an energized, focused public service
to deliver the outcomes the government of the day want?
Yeah. That's ultimately a leadership role
for every chief executive.
I, I, I mean, it would be massively unprofessional
to have somebody employed who wasn't committed
to delivering the outcomes
that have been agreed with the minister.
You, you don't get to choose other than if you
don't like it, you should leave.
You have to work
and deliver whatever's being agreed
with government of the day.
That's our job without fear or favor.
And I think New Zealand is a very long tradition
that demonstrating that.
But I don't know whether you've got,
Uh, no, I'm just on the, you know,
the concern about the 5%.
I mean, we're talking about people who are frontline staff
who work in, uh, call centers who Sure.
Uh, you know, uh, the interactions daily about being honest,
respectful, responsive, those sorts of, of values,
uh, and in their private lives, they're entirely entitled
to their free and democratic rights.
So I would say that it's not, uh, I mean, our target is,
and that's part of why we're doing the code of conduct work,
is to make sure that all public servants understand
political neutrality at its core.
Having said that, in the, in the public service,
the advisory part of the public service
that does the policy advice to ministers,
there's no question it would be totally unacceptable
to drag your feet on a government policy.
That's not, that is totally. So
I, I, I get that. And I'm
not doubting that, that,
that anyone thinks differently.
I'm just saying the question is really about the how, how
to do the public service commission
and then down through the layers of public service.
How do you ensure and,
and what gives you confidence to go, yeah, I can see that,
that these agencies
or these people are, are delivering this, who,
whomever is in government? Well,
I, I mean, it comes back to the, as I said, the CE
and ministerial relationship.
That's where, that's the where it all happens.
We as the commission have the opportunity
and do regularly check in with ministers
about whether their programs are being delivered
and any other issues that they have with the chief executive
and or their leadership team.
So that's quite a high touch model.
And if it's not working, then we intervene.
But it's never intervened because of political neutrality.
It'll be intervened
because prioritizations change, that's been my experience.
And we self-correct the system, self-corrects
that deliver against what ministers require.
And and I appreciate you haven't been in the role, Brian,
the whole time, but if I look over five years,
'cause I'm intentionally trying to cover different
governments, so to to, to sort of keep it agnostic here,
but how often or would you ever have to intervene?
Would you ever have situations
where there is a perception either from a chief executive
or a minister or a senior leader that actually
we are not getting the traction we should?
Maybe there's something slowing down, or,
It's, to be honest, I think that relationship is,
is very dynamic and very continuous.
So there are times everyone's human beings have bad
hair days, as they say.
You know, it doesn't, the relationship doesn't always work.
We, as the commission work really hard to make sure
that the relationships do work
and that, you know, both parties understand each other.
But, you know, we are not as,
we are not there as a policeman.
But if we have to be, we are, our job is to support
and coach the chief executives to do the best that they can
to deliver what the minister wants.
But I guess, and this will be my last question,
Madam Chair, have there been instances where you've had
to deal with an aspect
or a part of the public service
that hasn't been politically neutral?
I definitely never in my time
and there's never been a suggestion of a lack
of political neutrality.
But Hugo, you've been around the block? No.
Yeah, I'm not, I'm not aware of any instance. No.
Um, okay. Uh, having, you know, political neutrality
and all of these questions about what the right thing
to do is are quite nuanced decisions.
So they can be quite difficult to, there's no, you know, so
they're always judgment calls,
but, um, I've never experienced an instance where, yeah,
that is based on a, you know, political view.
Now there are, you know,
there is a tension in the relationship
with free and frank advice.
So our job is to give free and frank advice. Correct. Yeah.
And, you know, once that advice is received,
then the minister can say, and, uh,
and they do, uh, look, thank you for that.
Or, uh, you know,
or sometimes less, less happy about the advice.
Uh, but then it's our job to implement, you know,
we've given the advice, our job is to implement, so,
and then we think about the best way to implement that.
And there's no question about that.
Uh, and I, you know, I work with the policy profession and,
and we're all committed to doing that,
to doing our best advice.
Yeah. Yeah. Thanks.
Just to, um, I'll go
to who's been waiting a long time for your question.
Sure. But, um, just a quick supplementary on that, on, um,
ministerial advice, one of the probably less good
statistics in the survey results that you reported was 71%
of those involved in ministerial advice felt confident
that their advice was free and frank.
So that's relatively low compared to some
of the other measures, um, that you had.
Yep. And I think that that's really an interesting statistic
because, um, it doesn't necessarily go to
necessarily not being politically neutral,
but it goes to providing the best advice to ministers
and which is almost a step up from that.
And, and of course, as human beings, you, you want
to please the, you have good relationships
with the people that you work with.
Mm. And so, kind of aside from assuming that
that's not necessarily
or entirely connected to a political view,
how do you increase, um, the confidence of, um,
ministerial staff to provide that free and frank advice?
'cause that's, I think most people in the public would want
to see that advice being given to ministers.
Mm-hmm.
Yeah, I mean, one of the, uh, things,
and there's actually a recent PhD on this about, um,
there are different ideas of what, you know, free
and frank advice actually looks like.
Uh, so, uh, we're doing work, uh, as part
of the policy profession.
So that's being led through DPMC to really talk
through what that looks like.
So, um, you know, there are, there are, um,
uh, you know, so some of the survey results,
and it's the first time we've, um, measured, uh, perceptions
of free and frank advice, uh, are perceptions of what free
and frank advice might look like.
And it's clear that that differs, uh,
across the public service.
Um, so one of the things is to get greater clarity about
what we mean by the concept, what that looks like.
Uh, and there've been sort
of this active discussions about doing that.
Uh, I think in some of the, you know, OIA releases,
it's very clear that Free and Frank
and Vice is alive and well.
Mm-hmm. Um, you know, there's quite a lot
of documented evidence of that.
Uh, so I don't think I, you know, we, we are quite committed
'cause it's a central constitutional principle
of public service to really lifting the bar on that.
Um, but having a measure is really helpful as a way
of thinking through how can we get better. Yeah,
It'd be really interesting to see how that, um,
hopefully improves in the future
Too. But
thank you Madam Chair. Um, and thank you for the report.
It feels to me like, uh, one of the chief risks in terms
of managing trust is the governance of procurement
across the public sector.
Um, we do have the SFO,
but we've seen them take a near $1 million cut in their
budget, uh, from 2025 to 2026.
Um, they say on repeat that their job isn't really to be
that blanket coverage or to monitor.
Um, we've got the OAG reports,
which occasionally flag issues, um, in more
of a naming and shaming way.
And then we have some cases that are taken to the courts.
But my observation is there's quite a high bar threshold,
um, of what's deemed to be an appropriate there,
which is quite a contrast with the Australian system
wherein, um, 2018 they put in a judicial review
of government procurement act in place.
So two parts to the question.
Um, firstly, what is the, um, what is the process
or monitoring of procurement from government's perspective,
and then the monitoring of that?
Um, and is there a need for something that's, um,
less soft in terms of guidelines and policies
and more firm in terms of legislative change
that could aid in, um, ensuring
that there's sunlight over procurement?
Um, look, I, I think that one of those, some
of those questions are best for the, uh, functional lead
for procurement that sits in mb 'cause that's the expertise.
What I can talk about though, is some of the
work we've been doing to, um, off the back of
what we've seen around procurement
and the public service itself.
But I dunno if that gets to your, I think
that wouldn't get to your question.
I think we would recognize that,
and this is a matter of public record, that procurement,
that there have been issues on procurement, uh,
particularly in local government.
But that, so we remain
like there's a very high level of awareness.
Secondly, we do rely as the commission
on MV leading that,
but each agency has an audit every year.
We, we check the internal controls, we check the
separation of duties, very traditional ways of making sure
that no one person has the ability to hide,
you know, ill-gotten gains for want of a better word.
So all of that housekeeping is in place,
but we collectively feel
that it's gonna continue to come under increased pressure
because the stakes are getting higher.
You know, that there's some social economic issues here
for some of these people for making the decision.
So we, we are strengthening the processes,
we are strengthening the leadership
and we're strengthening the audit.
Mm-hmm. But I couldn't give you a guarantee
that there isn't a mischief at any point in time.
And we have to minimize that to the best of our ability.
I I I,
I was just gonna ask if there's a view on whether the
external, um, mechanisms for accountability are sufficient.
We, we think so, but we,
this whole area is, as I said earlier, very dynamic.
So we, we are not sitting passively thinking we are okay,
because we've now got a code of conduct,
or we've got the auditors.
It, it is, it, it is much more dynamic than that.
So we remain as a system alert to
where the gaps are in strengthening in its best we can.
And I think, as Hugo said earlier, we are also, uh,
I think looking at a much more risk-based approach.
Not, not all risks are equal, if that makes sense. Mm-hmm.
Procurement is an Achilles heel because there has cases
and there will continue to be cases,
and a lot of money goes through the public sector
and it goes to third parties.
And we have to have confidence that that's done according
to the ethics that we would expect.
And, and sorry. And if we find anything that it,
that it is prosecutors
and that, you know, these are matters for police,
but if there's fraud that we have zero tolerance for that.
There isn't a materiality if you breached it, you have to
be exited and you'll be prosecuted.
And I just wanted to add a kind
of general theme of the briefing.
I, I think, which is relevant here is that yes,
it's very important to have, you know, oversight
and control in those functions like the serious fraud office
and kind of yearly audits
and accountability mechanisms to make sure that you are kind
of, I identifying a problem where it arises.
But no matter how much you put into those functions,
you're never going to, um, be able to, um,
get the, uh, it's equally important, um,
to put in place the right, uh, put in place levers
that will help you to build the right sort
of behaviors and cultures.
So proactively try
and make sure that you are getting, you know, people
to understand, um, the right things to do.
And so we've got our general approach to, to building that
through codes of conduct and integrity.
But likewise, the MB procurement lead works really hard
to put in place, you know, good standards
and guidance for agencies about the processes
that they put in place and what's expected of their people
to make sure that they're
building the right sorts of culture.
And just a very quick follow up and,
and just as we had done law in front of us who talked about,
um, the use of deep fakes and evidence
and this new issue that they're hitting there now,
in the same way we can talk about fraud emerging across the
public sector and what we need to monitor for,
is there an increasing in expertise in terms of monitoring
for these new types of technology?
Yes, there is, but it's not universal across the system.
And, and that exposes us
And, and I just, I think the serious fraud office has
dedicated their entire long term briefing
and, uh, their long term insights briefing on the topic
of using tech, uh, increasing use, use of technology
to detect fraud and corruption.
So there's think further deep thinking
going into that issue.
Thank you. Mostly, oh, that's, I just wanna make,
make a comment before I shout.
It's really exciting that people are using technology
to actually predict
where the crime's actually coming and actually detect.
I think that's one problem we're using it.
Um, we were talking about integrity,
and one of the things that I think Parliament does is
reflecting the public in terms
of the population base is also part of the integrity.
So people actually feel like they belong in New Zealand.
Mm-hmm. How do you think public service actually fares in
terms of reflecting the population in the people
that actually, uh, become public servants?
I, I think we may have addressed the previous meeting.
I, I, we, we sort of feel, um,
are we absolutely reflective in a percentage sense?
Probably not, but actually we are well represented across
all ethnic groups.
Mm-hmm. Um, and that diversity is a strength for the system.
Um, and so can we do better?
I, I would think generally yes, we can,
but you know, as we recruit, we do look for diversity,
but it's also gotta be merit based. Mm-hmm. So,
Of course, I I wouldn't want it any
Other, we're managing that.
I think we are managing that well.
Um, but it's,
I I would definitely describe it as work in progress.
I think when it comes to that diversity of our staff,
that's one of the factors
that we think about when we think about
induction and training.
As we get different cultural groupings into
the public sector, we need to equip them to understand
what it means when we talk about codes of conduct,
when we talk about ethics,
when we talk about independence, all of those things.
And it's not to be disparaging, it's just everybody has
to have the same level of understanding of what is required.
And I don't think we've always done that.
Hmm. Do you, I'm not looking at numbers
or percentages of representation.
What I'm actually looking at is what is the barrier?
Have you actually had a discussion
or, you know, have that discussion actually happened
with people who are applying or fail
or, you know, trying to figure out
whether there is a, in fact a barrier?
You know, we often talk about the glass
ceiling for different things.
Yeah. I mean, is there a glass ceiling for public service
that prevent, um, people
who actually potentially come from other countries
who actually might want to be, uh, in New Zealand,
but actually have the ability to serve,
but they don't actually apply?
Uh, so there has been work that's been done
to look at the, how recruitment is framed in order to, uh,
try and address some of those barriers.
Mm. To ensure that we are looking
for the breadth of experience.
Um, so, you know, being quite careful about sort
of recruitment to ensure that we try
and recruit from the widest, uh, portion.
In terms of, um, you know,
there has been a shift in the public service workforce
makeup, the demographic makeup.
It has shifted quite a lot
where the big areas I think has been discussed before,
but we can provide data has been
around senior leadership now.
There has been, uh, change there too.
Uh, but the more changes needed, um, uh,
but certainly in the public service as a whole,
it has actually shifted over the last, uh, 10 years
and actually the last six years in particular,
where we've been much more aware of some
of the barriers created by the way that we drive,
do our job descriptions, some of the, um,
requirements that we have.
So we try and make sure we also get o other experience, um,
but then have to go through a merit based pro process so
that we get the best person for the position, which is
what the legislation, legislation says we must do.
I think, like Brian said,
even though you're not interested in, in percentages,
and I think it is indicative, you know, the fact
that we are broadly a representative
of the population from a statistical perspective
does indicate that people are able
to enter the public service from all
different walk walks that we have.
But, you know, that we would not ever wish
to see there be barriers to get the best people
with the greatest diversity
Into the public sector.
In terms of barriers, I, is there, um, a perceived, um,
barrier to, uh, choose certain people
concerning the fact that there's actually, you know,
global concern in terms of foreign interference, uh, the,
you know, bad actors are out there.
So what kind of, uh,
work do you actually do when you're actually screening?
Or sorry, in, in the, in the, uh, training of people
who actually are, um, actually already in the public service
to be aware, for example? Yeah,
So we do two things.
So there's the workforce assurance standards, which have,
uh, significantly strengthened the requirements
for agencies, particularly about referee checking, uh,
and more robust referee checking.
And now includes questions around integrity, also
around misconduct, uh, internally.
So, so there, there's been a lot
of work in the public service over the last few years to,
um, to strengthen the, the sort
of upfront screening that happens.
Uh, internally we've been talking
with the integrity champions around, uh, some of the flags
that you are wanting to be looking out for.
So some of those flags might be people not wanting to take,
uh, leave in certain periods because they're not wanting to,
because they've got something sort
of nefarious perhaps going on.
Uh, there are a range of agencies
that have quite good monitoring around patterns of behavior.
Uh, so, um, we are quite alert to, uh, sort
of changes and we're trying to alert managers
to think about changes in behavior.
We have a continuous requirement to,
of disclosure when things change in people's lives.
Mm-hmm. So there is a lot of work going on.
There's some work going on that I can't really talk about,
but, um, we, yeah,
We remain extremely alert.
That's very good. And,
and of course there's always, you know,
dependent on the role, there's, there's always the,
the option to have, uh, formal
security clearance requirements,
and that's a much thorough,
much more thorough vetting process as well.
So I think this is senior roles particularly. Yeah.
And that goes to the heart of why we did this briefing,
is we're part of a global community.
We are not immune from any of those behavioral trends,
and we have to protect ourselves before it's too late.
So, quick set from Andy
and then we'll just for my,
so just making sure we have enough time
For you. Just thinking of that global
community, I mean,
we've had quite a number of fairly high profile, um,
situations where people have been recruited, um,
from overseas.
Uh, and they've had, you know,
they've obviously been reliance on, um, uh,
on references from overseas.
Um, and, uh, some
of 'em come spectacularly at drift at significant cost
to other people, including high level people within public
service itself who've had to bear that cost in terms of that
checking process, make sure that it is robust.
Have there been lessons learned from that to make sure
that it is absolutely minimized in future?
Yes. We, we, we like to think
of ourselves as a learning system,
and when we've had bad experiences, we've adapted modified.
I, I think, and, you know, the most recent,
although not international, but you know, the Jeff
and mc skimming experience has really sharpened the focus
and the breadth of what we do now testing.
Um, we do run the risk
of people have alternative lives, it's quite hard to break
that into it.
Um, so we've gotta get a balance between
respecting the rights of an individual,
but respecting the needs of the system.
You know, I think it's an ongoing challenge
and one that will, over time,
I think there will be more intrusion into the role people
want to be a chief executive.
They're going to be exposed
to more scrutiny than would otherwise be the case.
We've also, uh, engaged internationally
with our counterparts
to test whether there are additional things we can do, um,
and to see how we compare, uh, all the changes we've done,
uh, actually quite
actually more robust than our international
counterparts is what we found.
Uh, there are some things that we can adopt from our
international counterparts, um,
but, uh, we've really wanted to test whether we were
an outlier, but actually it turns out that we're actually,
uh, putting in place now a whole lot of additional checks,
particularly for senior leaders, uh,
that put us quite in front.
You know, we, we are strongly the view
that if we get the best quality people,
we'll get a good quality outcome.
The process isn't gonna protect us. Yeah.
Very quick, very quick stuff. I do need to get
Just a supplementary on that. So
Maybe a quick answer to it.
I know you actually said there is a differential between,
you know, what we do as a job
and in the private life there must be certain point
where the personal life can actually create a problem.
So when do you actually, uh, at
what point do you actually investigate?
Um, I'm thinking like, for example,
I've actually seen instances where people have belonged
to a cult, for example, this is not a New Zealand example.
And, um, and that impacts on the work that they actually do.
Um, you know, and just wanna know if where,
where you would actually interfere or investigate.
Do you have a trigger point?
Well, I mean, it, it's actually a matter
for normal employment law about generally whether you're
bringing your employer into disrepute is often the kind
of angle, it's not a political neutrality or other angle.
It could be a co obviously a code of conduct question.
But there are normal employment law for an private
or public employer where your personal activities actually
undermine the reputation of an employer
or your ability to do your job.
But it's not my area of expertise, it's probably others.
It just trigger when the memory of
It's if, if, if
what you do in your non time impacts on your ability
to discharge your job
and all the obligations of that job,
then that comes to our attention.
We would investigate
and we would take whatever action is required.
Yeah.
Okay. Like David in
Goes, um, this, the commission's mandate doesn't extend
through to public servants within the local
government sector.
Um, I guess what, what risk do you see I guess, in taking
that siloed approach to different tier of government?
Uh, I don't know whether it's a siloed approach.
I mean, the commission's mandate has always been, uh,
related to the core public service, uh, values.
Uh, local government is slightly different.
It's a devolved sort of sector of government.
Um, and, you know,
it doesn't necessarily have quite the same context.
Um, so I mean, it has been discussed in the past,
but it would be a significant, uh, shift in,
uh, I mean, where you want the commission involved is
where we have specialized knowledge and ability.
And that is about
what makes the public service quite unique,
which is political neutrality, free
and frank advice, you know, those sorts of things.
So local government is much, much broader.
There is the OAG that has, uh,
has an oversight role in relation
to the local government sector.
The local government itself has legislation,
also has relevant codes.
It's also a devolved form of sort of democratic governance.
So there are some difficult questions in there about whether
you would expand what is an executive function of government
to a local delegated local government authority.
And I think you'd probably have a separate kind
of system for that person. Yeah.
What what we do know though is our guidance is used
by a lot of local government entities
and broader government entities.
Or even though we may not have a direct ability to control
and direct, they are using our material
to inform their own independence.
And how that,
In some ways you could consider that,
that it's inherent in, in the, the highest level
of governance, that there is a siloization there.
That the local government is not
accountable to central government.
They're separately democratically elected.
And so they are separate systems to an extent,
But there shouldn't be any daylight between what we adopt
and what they Sure. Thanks.
Thank you. I just had some, um, questions around the, uh,
public service census results,
which you have included in, in the report.
And I know that this is something that I think was one
of the first things the minister picked up
after the census was around the, uh, statistics in relation
to bullying and harassment with, with only 14%
of public servants Yeah.
Satisfied with how, uh, their, a complaint was resolved
and only 52% reported bullying harassment,
even though they experienced it.
Those are concerning figures,
and I think that's concern has been shown, shown across, um,
the political spectrum.
Um, and it is an integrity issue
because it goes to integrity of our workplaces.
So, um, what, uh, specific
actions are being put in place since you received those
results in order to address those concerning results?
I can talk To. Yeah.
I, I mean, maybe just firstly,
and I think we said this, you know, the concept
of not having a safe workplace is, is abhorrent, really.
And the idea that we have bullying
and harassment in our workplaces, uh,
was both shocking and disappointing.
And so as a result, we have got a number
of initiatives underway.
Yeah. Um, so one of the, uh,
core changes we've made has been to the,
um, speaking up guidance.
So we already had speaking up, which is one
of the most important ways that public servants are able to
speak up about wrongdoing as, as well as
through the protected disclosure regime.
But we made it very clear that people could come to us.
Uh, 'cause often if you are, uh, not,
if you are experiencing something in your organization,
you may have low trust in that organization.
Previously it, it just went up the line
to the chief executive.
So we've made that, uh, change
and that's had us quite a, uh, increase in volume
of complaints coming to us.
We did already receive complaints.
Uh, the second piece we've done has been, uh,
a supplementary, uh, which is your complaints,
your right rights, uh, guidance.
Uh, so that sets out what complainants
and what respondents can expect, uh,
that includes in some instances
where there's significant imbalance of power.
Yeah. The agencies consider providing, uh, legal support.
Uh, so particularly we've had, um,
quite some in the past some issues with complainants, uh,
who've experienced sexual harassment.
Uh, who, um, uh, the through
that process actually got damaged through
that process itself.
And if they'd had some proper legal support, uh, that,
that we would've avoided, that we've checked our guidance
with people who've experienced that
and had, uh, support for that.
So we've added that into it.
I also think the protected disclosure regime,
those changes have been really important
to provide protections.
Uh, we actually treat every speaking up as if it, you know,
we essentially try and, uh, ensure anonymity
and protect people, uh, through that process.
So we've, we are also doing training through the, um,
integrity champion network.
And then there's the, um, health
and safety workplace leads are also treating it as a,
as an example of psychosocial.
And every chief executive, um, has been required
to get their own response plan to the bit
of the census that related to them.
And this is one of the things, once again
with the chief executives, we talk about guidance,
but you know, this is a non-negotiable point.
You have to make your workplace safe
and people need to feel that there is an, an,
an appropriate balance of power.
Just, um, finally, almost out of time, um,
there are significant number of, uh, recommendations, uh,
or options, uh, in the latter part of the report mm-hmm.
Over the next 12 months.
Uh, which of those recommendations will you be following
Through with?
Um, so there are a range of, um,
'cause the briefing can't provide
recommendation, you know, options.
Yeah. Options, options, options.
So we are picking up on a number of those including, uh,
some of the suggestions from the auditor general
as well, OAG.
Um, so, uh, we have a, um,
currently have an action plan, which we publicly report on
that includes, uh, obviously the, you know, the, uh,
taking forward the reset of behaviors, which is one
of the actions and the training, uh, we're adding in.
Um, we're working at the moment.
Uh, we've got, I think it's, we've, um, provided a response.
We've got a, uh,
and we've got a, developed a sort of a strategy
that we're under underway internally,
but we're working on that risk-based model.
So we can more, more closely target, uh, areas
of risk in terms of i procurement such as procurement.
Uh, we've also, um, taken on board, uh, we,
we've developed a new measurement framework,
which we'll publish on.
Uh, we're just working on that.
We've got, uh, we've got about 50%
of the data we already have.
We have additional data that we've sourced, uh,
or are sourcing from across the system,
which is already collected.
And then there's a bit of new data that we are going to have
to collect, uh, which we've got underway.
So that's the sort of measurement and reporting side of it.
Uh, so that's going to give us a lot more. Um,
But if it's helpful to the committee,
we can give you a more detailed briefing about
what our action plan is
and what the sequence of events is likely to be.
I mean, it, it is, as I said earlier, it's,
it's not something, you know, we are very active.
It's not a passive exercise,
and it, it just reflects the sense
of urgency based on global experience that we just have
to lift our game and be more diligent.
Thank you. Well, and now out of time.
So thank you, thank you three very much for joining us
and for all actively participating in the hearing
and also for this, um, excellent report.
And thank you. Thank you very much.
And it is any follow up questions? Yeah. Appreciate it.
Thank you.